---
layout: post
title:  "Conflict: the Condo from Hell"
date:   2015-09-16
---

<p class="intro"><span class="dropcap">W</span>hen I first moved back to Chicago from NYC, I lived in a condo in Roscoe Village. The neighborhood was great, the inside of the condo was beautiful, and I was excited to be paying a fraction of what I would have paid in Brooklyn for the same type of place. There were only two problems: upstairs and downstairs. I lived on the third floor. The fourth floor was the top unit, and a couple with two giant yellow labs lived there. The second floor unit directly below me was  occupied by a guy in his early 20s who liked to party late and sleep-in. (The ground floor unit was commercial, owned by a mortgage company. They were great!). The people above me seemed like good folks, and I love dogs, but I did not love dogs wrestling above my head constantly, shaking my light fixtures. I did not love that the woman who lived above sounded like an elephant in high heels on their wood floors. The guy below me blasted house music at all hours of the night and then complained when my cat jumped off my bed in the morning. The sound of a 12 pound cat landing on the floor woke him up, and this was just completely unacceptable to him. The whole situation enraged me. I felt trapped and powerless, and in a way I was trapped: I couldn't just up and move, and on top of that I had not just one source of annoyance, but was sandwiched between two: I could barely hear myself think in my condo because of the people above me and the music below me, and I was afraid to walk around in my own place because of the guy below me.</p>

So what did I do? I fumed, a lot. I googled "how to get back at noisy neighbors". Reading stories written by people who were in similar situations was validating, and dreaming about "getting even", even though I knew I wouldn't do any of the things suggested, was cathartic. I'm not good at confrontation, but eventually I did ask the woman upstairs if she could try not to wear high heels in the house, and if they could try to keep the dogs from wrestling. The high heel situation improved, the dog wrestling did not. I tried talking to the guy below me about his loud music, and his response was basically that he could do whatever he wanted in his own place (but apparently I couldn't do whatever I wanted in mine if it distured his beauty sleep). So I fumed some more. I blasted the speakers on my tv. I wore headphones. I bought a noise machine. Eventually, I got sort of used to it. Not happy, but used to it. And then finally I did move. Because sometimes you can't change a situation, you need to remove yourself from it entirely. It's not fair, but it happens.

We now live in a 100 year-old house in Oak Park. No one lives above us or below us. There are no granite countertops, double sinks or walk-in closets like in the condo. The kitchen desperately needs to be updated and the main bathroom is the size of a shoebox. But the neighborhood is great and the neighbors are also great (having their own walls, floors and ceilings helps). It's been years since we moved, but I still cringe whenever my own dogs runs around the living room, until I remember there is nothing living in the basement for her to disturb except for maybe the cat.