---
layout: post
title:  "Pair Programming"
date:   2015-08-29
---

<p class="intro"><span class="dropcap">I</span><p>s it a bad sign that I'm not onsite at DBC yet, and I'm already tired of pair programming? I always like it once I start, but I dread it beforehand. I'm an introvert (I like people, but I need my down time, and I prefer working alone), and when I hear "peer programming" I think "group work". Ugh, group work. Cue flashbacks to middle school. Does ANYONE like group work? In addition to the gut "ugh" reaction to group work, there's the awkwardness factor. Everyone I have paired with so far has been great, and I've learned a ton from each person and session, but there's just something awkward about working one on one with someone you barely know. The awkwardness might be improved by pair programming in-person, since I think a lot of it has to do with pairing via google hangouts (you can't really get a good sense of body language on a video call).</p>

<p>Reading anonymous feedback has been less uncomfortable than pairing, but giving feedback is tough. When I give specific, constructive feedback, I feel like I'm not being nice, and then I worry about being too nice and not helping the other person out. The only sort of negative (and it isn't even negative) feedback is that I should try to explain my thought process more to my pair, and slow down. I'm working on that. I recognize that I jump around in my head a ton, and that is probably part of why I dread pair programming. In addition to the awkwardness of a video call, I realize I have difficulty explaining my thought processes to others, and I get sort of tongue tied on the call. I've known I have trouble explaining what I am doing for awhile, and it is something I need to work on, because explaining what you are thinking and doing to the rest of your team (or to your client, if you are freelancing) is key to working as a developer. Thankfully, I know how I can improve: more peer programming!</p>